---
layout: post
title: Things every architect should know
categories: [architecture, software engineering]
type: post
published: true
author: Angelo Hulshout
---


Thanks to the people behind the [SE News newsletter](http://www.se-news.org) I
came across the announcement of the book [97 Things Every Architect Should
Know](http://97-things.near-time.net), to be published by
[O'Reilly](http://www.oreilly.com/) early 2009. The site looks a bit sloppy,
it's a badly formatted Wiki, but if you take your time you can find little
gems like the one below.

I'm not sure if this book is going to be more than a bundling of 97 ideas from
random people, but the fact that the site will remain even after the book is
out will give us a chance to decide.

Anyway - this one is fully in line with what I am teaching at the [PDEng
programme at the Stan Ackermans Institute](http://wwwooti.win.tue.nl) in
Eindhoven the coming 15 months. Just think about itâ€¦ These three paragraphs
capture a problem that approaches like those of the Agile movement are trying
to address, but this is one of the briefest and to the point descriptions of
the problem. It makes me wonder about the other 96 items selected for the
book.

_One of the most attractive temptations on a software development project is
to consider it successful if it simply meets the written requirements on time
and on budget. When the pressure is on and deadlines are approaching the
requirements list makes for an appealing defense against the struggles of a
project and its architecture. The problem with this outlook is that it does
not take into account the premise of any software project: to make the lives
of the users better._

Architects treating the identified requirements as the cumulative to-do list
for a project are placing an implicit roadblock to discovering the real needs
of the client. They run the risk of choosing an architectural approach that
would seem foolish if the requirements were reasoned about to discover the
deeper meanings within. By taking this viewpoint the architect places himself
aligned with the words of the requirements while rejecting their intent. There
is no driving need or desire to discover those intentions since expanding on
the requirements means the project will have increased scope to deal with to
be "successful". Meanwhile the client is left with a project that risks being
little better off then what they could verbally express.

Instead an architect should consider the current set of discovered
requirements as a living list of open discussion points. The relationship
between the architect and the client now becomes one of shared discovery
instead of trying to see how many requirements can be checked off as complete.
Each requirement forms an entry point into a conversation to a deeper
understanding of the problem and the boundaries for the set of possible
solutions to choose from. By taking the view that a requirement is simply
accumulated current knowledge an architect is encouraged to approach each one
as if the problem will change or at least might be better understood tomorrow.
The architect is driven to produce software that is a joy to use and makes the
user's lives better.

